add a troubleshooting guide for multicluster (#8957)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ops/diagnostic-tools/multicluster/index.md

---

> title: Troubleshooting Multi-Cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Troubleshooting Multicluster
```

description: Describes tools and techniques to diagnose issues with multi-cluster and multi-network installations.

> weight: 20

Reviewer 2: The weight collides with two other pages (we should update one of them as well): proxy-command and virtual-machines. The weights should be set up so the items on the diagnostic-tools page show in the desired order.

keywords: [debug,multi-cluster,multi-network,envoy]
owner: istio/wg-environments-maintainers

> test: n/a

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this should be a `no`. If there is anything that can be tested on this page (and I suspect there is as there are a number of scripts), this should be `no`. `n/a` is reserved for those pages that do not need tests.

Author: I guess testing this could be possible: intentionally setting up clusters the wrong way then verifying the results are broken in the ways we expect?

---

> This page describes how to troubleshoot issues with Istio deployed to Virtual Machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page describes how to troubleshoot issues with Istio Multicluster.
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ for i in $(seq 10); do kubectl --context=$CTX_CLUSTER1 -n sample exec sleep-dd98b5f48-djwdw -c sleep -- curl -s helloworld:5000/hello; done
Hello version: v1, instance: helloworld-v1-578dd69f69-j69pf
Hello version: v1, instance: helloworld-v1-578dd69f69-j69pf
Hello version: v1, instance: helloworld-v1-578dd69f69-j69pf
...
{{< /text >}}

When following the guide to [verify multicluster installation](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/multicluster/verify/)
we would expect both `v1` and `v2` responses, indicating traffic is going to both clusters.

There are many possible causes to the problem:

### Locality Load Balancing

Ensure that locality [load balancing](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/locality-load-balancing/failover/#configure-locality-failover) is not configured or the clusters are in the same locality (region/zone). Locality LB always prefers nearby services, so keeping requests in the same-cluster is working as intended in that case.

### Trust Configuration

**Plug-in Certs:**

You can follow the [Plugin CA Certs](/docs/tasks/security/cert-management/plugin-ca-cert/) guide, ensuring to run

> the steps for every cluster.

Reviewer: consider moving this sentence after the verify certs check below

To verify certs are configured correctly, you can compare the root-cert in each cluster:

{{< text bash >}}
$ diff \
   $(kubectl --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -n istio-system get secret cacerts -ojsonpath='{.data.root-cert\.pem}') \
   $(kubectl --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -n istio-system get secret cacerts -ojsonpath='{.data.root-cert\.pem}')
{{< /text >}}

### Step-by-step Diagnosis

> The following steps assume you're following the [HelloWorld verification](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install multicluster/verify/).

Reviewer 3: I think this should be a relative link. Otherwise, different releases could get out of sync

If the external IP is present, check that the Service includes a `topology.istio.io/network` label with the correct value. If that is incorrect, reinstall the gateway and make sure to set the --network flag on the generation script.

**The network of either the client or server cannot be determined.**

On the source pod, check the proxy metadata.

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get pod $SLEEP_POD_NAME \
  -o jsonpath="{.spec.containers[*].env[?(@.name=='ISTIO_META_NETWORK')].value}"
{{< /text >}}

{{< text bash >}}
kubectl get pod $HELLOWORLD_POD_NAME \
  -o jsonpath="{.metadata.labels.topology\.istio\.io/network}"
{{< /text >}}

If either of these values aren't set, or have the wrong value, istiod may treat the source and client proxies as being on the same network and send network-local endpoints.
When these aren't set, check that `values.global.network` was set properly during install, or that the injection webhook is configured correctly.

> Istio determines the network of a Pod using the `topology.istio.io/network` label which is set during injection. For non-injected Pods, we rely on the `topology.istio.io/network`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Istio determines the network of a Pod using the `topology.istio.io/network` label which is set during injection. For non-injected Pods, Istio relies on the `topology.istio.io/network`
```

---
title: Debugging Virtual Machines

> description: Describes tools and techniques to diagnose issues with Virtual Machines.

Reviewer: Should this be multicluster instead of VM?

Author: right, thanks!

---

This page describes how to troubleshoot issues with Istio deployed to multiple clusters and/or networks.
Before reading this, you should take the steps in [Multicluster Installation](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/)
and read the [Deployment Models](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/) guide.

## Cross-Cluster Load Balancing

The most common, but also broad problem with multi-network installations is that cross-cluster load balancing doesn’t work. Usually this manifests itself as only seeing responses from the cluster-local instance of a Service:

{{< text bash >}}
$ for i in $(seq 10); do kubectl --context=$CTX_CLUSTER1 -n sample exec sleep-dd98b5f48-djwdw -c sleep -- curl -s helloworld:5000/hello; done
Hello version: v1, instance: helloworld-v1-578dd69f69-j69pf
Hello version: v1, instance: helloworld-v1-578dd69f69-j69pf
Hello version: v1, instance: helloworld-v1-578dd69f69-j69pf
...
{{< /text >}}

When following the guide to [verify multicluster installation](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/verify/)
we would expect both `v1` and `v2` responses, indicating traffic is going to both clusters.

There are many possible causes to the problem:

### Locality Load Balancing

> Ensure that locality [load balancing](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/locality-load-balancing/failover/#configure-locality-failover) is not configured or the clusters are in the same locality (region/zone). Locality LB always prefers nearby services, so keeping requests in the same-cluster is working as intended in that case.

Reviewer 3: It would be good in each of these subsections to briefly describe the topic and how it might impact cross-cluster LB before going on to describe how to fix it.

### Trust Configuration

> **Plug-in Certs:**

Reviewer 3: The introduction here should describe how two clusters need to share a common root of trust. We should also mention that if you just install Istio blindly in the two clusters, they'll default use generated root ca's which will not allow them to communicate.

To verify certs are configured correctly, you can compare the root-cert in each cluster:

{{< text bash >}}
$ diff \
   $(kubectl --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -n istio-system get secret cacerts -ojsonpath='{.data.root-cert\.pem}') \
   $(kubectl --context="${CTX_CLUSTER1}" -n istio-system get secret cacerts -ojsonpath='{.data.root-cert\.pem}')
{{< /text >}}

You can follow the [Plugin CA Certs](/docs/tasks/security/cert-management/plugin-ca-cert/) guide, ensuring to run
the steps for every cluster.

> ### Step-by-step Diagnosis

Reviewer 3: IIUC this section, assumes that you've already verified that the above sections are not an issue. Maybe we should say that here?

### Locality Load Balancing

[Locality load balancing](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/locality-load-balancing/failover/#configure
-locality-failover) can be used to make clients prefer that traffic go to the nearest destination. If the clusters

> are in different localities (region/zone), locality load balancing will prefer the local-cluster ans is working as

Reviewer 3: spelling: ans->and

### Step-by-step Diagnosis

> If none of the above solved the issue breaking cross-cluster load-balancing, this will require more in-depth

Reviewer 3: Maybe something like "If you've gone through the sections above and are still having issues with cross-cluster load-balancing, then it's time to dig a little deeper." ... wdyt?

Author: Yeah, that sounds better.
